UI Metrics documentation (#9048)
hashicorp/consul: website/pages/docs/connect/observability/ui-visualization.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Connect - UI Visualization
sidebar_title: UI Visualization
description: |-
  This page describes how to set up and customize the Service Mesh Topology
  visualization in Consul's UI.
---

# UI Visualization

Since Consul 1.9.0, Consul's built in UI includes a topology visualization to
show a service's immediate connectivity at a glance. It is not intended as a

> replacement for dedication monitoring solutions, but rather as a quick overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
replacement for dedicated monitoring solutions, but rather as a quick overview
```

> of the state of a service and it's connections within the Service Mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the state of a service and its connections within the Service Mesh.
```

The topology visualization requires services to be using [Consul
Connect](/docs/connect) via [side-car proxies](/docs/connect/proxies).

The visualization may optionally be configured to include a link to an external
per-service dashboard. This is designed to provide convenient deep links to your
existing monitoring or Application Performance Monitoring (APM) solution for
each service. More information can be found in [Configuring Dashboard
URLs](#configuring-dashboard-urls).

It is possible to configure the UI to fetch basic metrics from your metrics
provider storage to augment the visualization as displayed below.

TODO: realistic screenshot here

Consul has built-in support for overlaying metrics from a
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) backend. Alternative metrics providers may
be supported using a new and experimental Javascript API. See [Custom Metrics
Providers](#custom-metrics-providers).

## Configuring the UI To Display Metrics

> To configure Consul's UI to be able to fetch metrics there are several

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure Consul's UI to fetch metrics there are several
```

configuration variables needed. These need to be set on each Consul Agent that
is responsible for serving the UI. If there are multiple clients with the UI

> enabled in a Datacenter for redundancy, these configurations should be added to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enabled in a datacenter for redundancy these configurations should be added to
```

all of them.

> We assume that the UI is already enabled which since Consul 1.9.0 is done by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume that the UI is already enabled by
```

setting [`ui_config.enabled`](/docs/agent/options#ui_config_enabled) to `true`
in the agent's configuration file.

> To use the built-in Prometheus provider,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the built-in Prometheus provider
```

[`ui_config.metrics_provider`](/docs/agent/options#ui_config_metrics_provider)
must be set to `prometheus`.

> Finally, the UI currently must query the metrics provider through a proxy
> endpoint to simplify setup where Prometheus isn't already publicly available to
> user's browsers directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UI must query the metrics provider through a proxy endpoint. This
simplifies deployment where Prometheus is not exposed externally to UI users'
browsers.
```

> To set this up, provide the URL that the _Consul agent_ can reach the Prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set this up, provide the URL that the _Consul agent_ should use to reach the Prometheus
```

> server on in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
server in
```

service named `prometheus-server` so each Consul agent can reach it on
`http://prometheus-server` (using Kubernetes' DNS resolution).

A full configuration to enable Prometheus is given below.

```hcl
ui_config {
  enabled = true
  metrics_provider = "prometheus"
  metrics_proxy {
    base_url = "http://prometheus-server"
  }
}
```

## Configuring Dashboard URLs

Since Consul's visualization is intended as an overview of your mesh and not a
comprehensive monitoring tool, you can configure a service dashboard URL
template which allows users to click directly through to the relevant
service-specific dashboard in an external tool like Grafana or a hosted
provider.

To configure this, you must provide a URL template in the [agent configuration
file](/docs/agent/options#ui_config_dashboard_url_templates) for all agents that
have the UI enabled. The template is essentially the URL to the external
dashboard, but can have placeholder values which will be replaced with the
service name, namespace and datacenter where appropriate to allow deep-linking
to the relevant information.

An example with Grafana is shown below.

```hcl
ui_config {
  enabled = true
  dashboard_url_templates {

>     service = "https://grafana.example.com/d/lDlaj-NGz/ ⏎

Reviewer 2: I don't think these `⏎` characters was intended?

Author: They were to show that I was manually word-wrapping the long line. Does that seem confusing? The `pre` tag will allow the line to continue off the page otherwise which makes it hard to see the actual interpolation in the URL, but since it's one string in HCL I didn't want to break it into a multiline string which would also break.

It does mean it's not copy-pastable but I feel the value of this is showing the example rather than being something to copy.

Woudl be be clearer to add a note after like:

 > Note ⏎ indicates word-wrapping added to make the long URL line easier to read but it must be a single value in HCL

Or something?

Author: I removed them and made a note not to copy the line breaks:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/120915/98398943-a35ea880-2059-11eb-8b96-47df2c5d0a3a.png)

      service-overview?orgId=1&var-service={{Service.Name}}& ⏎
      var-namespace={{Service.Namespace}}&var-dc={{Datacenter}}"
  }
}
```

TODO: show screenshot of the configured link in the topology view.

### Metrics Proxy

> In many cases the metrics backend may not be exposed outside of the datacenter
> to user's browser or may be on a different domain and so subject to CORS
> restrictions. To make it simpler to serve the metrics to the UI in these cases,
> the Consul agent can proxy requests for metrics from the UI to the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many cases the metrics backend may be inaccessible to UI users' browsers or
may be on a different domain and so subject to CORS restrictions. To make it
simpler to serve the metrics to the UI in these cases, the Consul agent can
proxy requests for metrics from the UI to the backend.
```

> **This is intended to enable simple setup in test and demo environments. Careful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**This is intended to simplify setup in test and demo environments. Careful
```

consideration should be given towards using this in production.**

The simplest configuration is described in [Configuring the UI for
metrics](#configuring-the-ui-for-metrics).

#### Metrics Proxy Security

~> **Security Note**: Exposing a backend metrics service to potentially
 un-authenticated network traffic via the proxy should be _carefully_ considered
 in production.

> The proxy endpoint is an internal one intended only for UI use however by
> enabling it anyone with network access to the agent's API port is potentially
> able to access metrics from the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metrics proxy endpoint is internal and intended only for UI use. However by
enabling it anyone with network access to the Consul agent's API port may use
it to access metrics from the backend.
```

**If ACLs are not enabled, full access to metrics will be exposed to
un-authenticated workloads on the network**.

With ACLs enabled, the proxy endpoint requires a valid token with read access to
all nodes and services (across all namespaces in Enterprise). It's typical for
most authenticated users to have this level of access in Consul as it's required
for viewing the catalog or discovering services. For example if you use a
[Single Sign-On

> integration](http://localhost:3000/docs/security/acl/auth-methods/oidc) (Consul

Reviewer 2: Includes full link to `localhost` for Single Sign-On, I think this should just be `/docs/security/acl/auth-methods/oidc`?

> With ACLs enabled, the proxy endpoint requires a valid token with read access to
> all nodes and services (across all namespaces in Enterprise). It's typical for
> most authenticated users to have this level of access in Consul as it's required
> for viewing the catalog or discovering services. For example if you use a
> [Single Sign-On
> integration](http://localhost:3000/docs/security/acl/auth-methods/oidc) (Consul
> Enterprise) for the UI the users will automatically be issued an ACL token that
> will be allowed access to the metrics through the proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With ACLs enabled, the proxy endpoint requires a valid token with read access
to all nodes and services (across all namespaces in Enterprise):

```hcl
# Consul OSS
service_prefix "" {
  policy = "read"
}
node_prefix "" {
  policy = "read"
}
# Consul Enterprise
namespace_prefix "" {
  service_prefix "" {
    policy = "read"
  }
  node_prefix "" {
    policy = "read"
  }
}
```

It's typical for most authenticated users to have this level of access in
Consul as it's required for viewing the catalog or discovering services. If you
use a [Single Sign-On
integration](/docs/security/acl/auth-methods/oidc) (Consul
Enterprise) users of the UI can be automatically issued an ACL token with the
privileges above to be allowed access to the metrics through the proxy.
```

Even with ACLs enabled, the proxy endpoint doesn't deeply understand the query
language of the backend so there is no way it can enforce least-privilege access
to only specific service-related metrics.

_If you are not comfortable with all users of Consul having full access to the
metrics backend, you should not use the proxy and find an alternative like using
a custom provider that can query the metrics backend directly_.

##### Path Allowlist

To limit exposure of the metrics backend, paths must be explicitly added to an
allowlist to avoid exposing unintended parts of the API. For example with
Prometheus, both the `/api/v1/query_range` and `/api/v1/query` endpoints are
needed to load time-series and individual stats. If the proxy had the `base_url`
set to `http://prometheus-server` then the proxy would also expose read access
to several other endpoints such as `/api/v1/status/config` which includes all
Prometheus configuration which might include sensitive information.

> The default value for `metrics_proxy.path_allowlist` is `["/api/v1/query_range",
> "/api/v1/query"]` so that if you are using the built in provider, this is
> already limited to the essential endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use the built-in `prometheus` provider the proxy is limited to the
essential endpoints. The default value for `metrics_proxy.path_allowlist` is
`["/api/v1/query_range", "/api/v1/query"]`.
```

If you use a custom provider that uses the metrics proxy, you'll need to
explicitly set the allowlist based on the endpoints the provider needs to
access.

#### Adding Headers

It is also possible to configure the proxy to add one or more headers to
requests as they pass through. This is useful when the metrics backend requires
authentication. For example if your metrics are shipped to a hosted provider,
you could provision an API token specifically for the Consul UI and configure
the proxy to add it as in the example below. This keeps the API token only
visible to Consul operators in the configuration file while UI users can query
the metrics they need without separately obtaining a token for that provider or
having a token exposed to them that they might be able to use elsewhere.

```hcl
ui_config {
  enabled = true
  metrics_provider = "example-apm"
  metrics_proxy {

>     base_url = "http://example-apm/api/v1/metrics"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    base_url = "https://example-apm/api/v1/metrics"
```

    add_headers = [
      {
        name = "Authorization"
        value = "Bearer <token>"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Custom Metrics Providers

Consul 1.9.0 includes a built-in provider for fetching metrics from

> [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io). To enable others to use the feature along
> with other existing metrics stores and hosted services, we created a "metrics
> provider" interface in Javascript. A custom provider may be written and the
> javascript file served by the Consul agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io). To enable the UI visualization feature to
work with other existing metrics stores and hosted services, we created a
"metrics provider" interface in Javascript. A custom provider may be written
and the javascript file served by the Consul agent.
```

~> **Note**: this interface is _experimental_ and may change in breaking ways or
 be removed entirely as we discover the needs of the community. Please provide

>  feedback on Github or [Discuss](https://discuss.hashicorp.com/) on how you'd

Reviewer 2: Small nit: "Github" should be "GitHub". Maybe it should also include a link like Discuss?

 like to use this.

The template for a complete provider Javascript file is given below.

```Javascript
(function () {
  var provider = {
    /**
     * init is called when the provider is first loaded.
     *
     * options.providerOptions contains any operator configured parameters
     * specified in the `metrics_provider_options_json` field of the Consul
     * agent configuration file.
     *

>      * Consul will provide a boolean field options.metrics_proxy_enabled to
>      * indicate whether the agent has a metrics proxy configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * Consul will provide:
     *
     * 1. A boolean field options.metrics_proxy_enabled to indicate whether the agent
     *    has a metrics proxy configured.
     *
     * 2. A fetch-like options.fetch which is a thin fetch wrapper that prefixes
     *    any url with the url of Consul's proxy endpoint and adds your current
     *    Consul ACL token to the request headers. Otherwise it functions like the
     *    browsers native fetch
```

Author: What does "fetch-like" mean? Shouldn't we just describe the method signature?

Author: Oh nm, I read to the end TIL about https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API I'll link those API docs to make this clear to others who've not head about it before.

code listing in the last section.

```hcl
ui_config {
  enabled = true
  metrics_provider = "example-provider"
  metrics_provider_files = ["/usr/local/bin/example-metrics-provider.js"]
  metrics_provider_options_json = <<-EOT
    {
      "foo": "bar"
    }
  EOT
}
```

More than one javascript file may be specified in
[`metrics_provider_files`](/docs/agent/options#ui_config_metrics_provider_files)
and all we be served allowing flexibility if needed to include dependencies.
Only one metrics provider can be configured and used at one time.

The
[`metrics_provider_options_json`](/docs/agent/options#ui_config_metrics_provider_options_json)
field is an optional literal JSON object which is passed to the provider's
`init` method at startup time. This allows configuring arbitrary parameters for
the provider in config rather than hard coding them into the provider itself to
make providers more reusable.

The provider may fetch metrics directly from another source although in this
case the agent will probably need to serve the correct CORS headers to prevent
browsers from blocking these requests. These may be configured with

> [`http_config.response_headers`](http://localhost:3000/docs/agent/options#response_headers).

Reviewer 2: Another instance of full link to `localhost`.

Alternatively, the provider may choose to use the [built-in metrics
proxy](#metrics-proxy) to avoid cross domain issues or to inject additional
authorization headers without requiring each UI user to be separately

> authenticated to the metrics backend. To do so, requests should be made to
> `/v1/internal/ui/metrics-proxy/<path>`. All components in the `<path>` will be
> appended to the configured
> [`base_url`](/docs/agent/options#ui_config_metrics_proxy_base_url) in the
> agent's metrics proxy configuration, and the request forwarded. The response
> will be returned without any modification to be interpreted by the provider and
> converted into the format as described in the interface above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authenticated to the metrics backend.

A fetch-like function is provided to the metrics provider javascript during
`init` as `options.fetch`. This is a thin fetch wrapper that prefixes any url
with the url of Consul's metrics proxy endpoint and adds your current Consul
ACL token to the request headers. Otherwise it functions like the browsers
native fetch and will forward your request on to the metrics backend. The
response will be returned without any modification to be interpreted by the
provider and converted into the format as described in the interface above.
```

tokens, access cookies and local storage for the Consul UI domain and possibly
more.

## Current Limitations

Currently there are some limitations to this feature.

- **No cross-datacenter support** The initial metrics provider integration is
  with Prometheus which is popular and easy to setup within one Kubernetes
  cluster. However, when using the Consul UI in a multi-datacenter deployment,
  the UI allows users to select any datacenter to view.

  This means that the Prometheus server that the Consul agent serving the UI can
  access likely only has metrics for the local datacenter and a full solution
  would need additional proxying or exposing remote Prometheus servers on the
  network in remote datacenters. Later we may support an easy way to set this up
  via Consul Connect but initially we don't attempt to fetch metrics in the UI
  if you are browsing a remote datacenter.

- **Built-in provider requires metrics proxy** Initially the built-in
  `prometheus` provider only support querying Prometheus via the [metrics
  proxy](#metrics-proxy). Later it may be possible to configure it for direct
  access to an expose Prometheus.

> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Enterprise) for the UI the users will automatically be issued an ACL token that
will be allowed access to the metrics through the proxy.

Even with ACLs enabled, the proxy endpoint doesn't deeply understand the query
language of the backend so there is no way it can enforce least-privilege access
to only specific service-related metrics.

_If you are not comfortable with all users of Consul having full access to the
metrics backend, you should not use the proxy and find an alternative like using
a custom provider that can query the metrics backend directly_.

##### Path Allowlist

To limit exposure of the metrics backend, paths must be explicitly added to an
allowlist to avoid exposing unintended parts of the API. For example with
Prometheus, both the `/api/v1/query_range` and `/api/v1/query` endpoints are
needed to load time-series and individual stats. If the proxy had the `base_url`
set to `http://prometheus-server` then the proxy would also expose read access
to several other endpoints such as `/api/v1/status/config` which includes all
Prometheus configuration which might include sensitive information.

> The default value for `metrics_proxy.allowed_paths` is `["/api/v1/query_range",

Author: ```suggestion
The default value for `metrics_proxy.path_allowlist` is `["/api/v1/query_range",
```

replacement for dedicated monitoring solutions, but rather as a quick overview
of the state of a service and its connections within the Service Mesh.

The topology visualization requires services to be using [Consul
Connect](/docs/connect) via [side-car proxies](/docs/connect/proxies).

The visualization may optionally be configured to include a link to an external
per-service dashboard. This is designed to provide convenient deep links to your
existing monitoring or Application Performance Monitoring (APM) solution for
each service. More information can be found in [Configuring Dashboard
URLs](#configuring-dashboard-urls).

It is possible to configure the UI to fetch basic metrics from your metrics
provider storage to augment the visualization as displayed below.

![Consul UI Service Mesh Visualization](/img/ui-service-topology.png)

Consul has built-in support for overlaying metrics from a
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) backend. Alternative metrics providers may
be supported using a new and experimental JavaScript API. See [Custom Metrics
Providers](#custom-metrics-providers).

## Configuring the UI To Display Metrics

> To configure Consul's UI to fetch metrics two required configuration settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure Consul's UI to fetch metrics there are two required configuration settings.
```

~> **Note**: this interface is _experimental_ and may change in breaking ways or
 be removed entirely as we discover the needs of the community. Please provide
 feedback on [GitHub](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul) or
 [Discuss](https://discuss.hashicorp.com/) on how you'd like to use this.

The template for a complete provider JavaScript file is given below.

```JavaScript
(function () {
  var provider = {
    /**
     * init is called when the provider is first loaded.
     *
     * options.providerOptions contains any operator configured parameters
     * specified in the `metrics_provider_options_json` field of the Consul
     * agent configuration file.
     *
     * Consul will provide:
     *
     * 1. A boolean field options.metrics_proxy_enabled to indicate whether the
     *    agent has a metrics proxy configured.
     *
     * 2. A function options.fetch which is a thin wrapper around the browser's
     *    [Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API)
     *    that prefixes any url with the url of Consul's internal metrics proxy
     *    endpoint and adds your current Consul ACL token to the request

>      *    headers. Otherwise it functions like the browsers native fetch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     *    headers. Otherwise it functions like the browser's native fetch.
```

field is an optional literal JSON object which is passed to the provider's
`init` method at startup time. This allows configuring arbitrary parameters for
the provider in config rather than hard coding them into the provider itself to
make providers more reusable.

The provider may fetch metrics directly from another source although in this
case the agent will probably need to serve the correct CORS headers to prevent
browsers from blocking these requests. These may be configured with
[`http_config.response_headers`](/docs/agent/options#response_headers).

Alternatively, the provider may choose to use the [built-in metrics
proxy](#metrics-proxy) to avoid cross domain issues or to inject additional
authorization headers without requiring each UI user to be separately
authenticated to the metrics backend.

A function that behaves like the browser's [Fetch
API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) is provided to
the metrics provider JavaScript during `init` as `options.fetch`. This is a thin
wrapper that prefixes any url with the url of Consul's metrics proxy endpoint
and adds your current Consul ACL token to the request headers. Otherwise it

> functions like the browsers native fetch and will forward your request on to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions like the browser's native fetch and will forward your request on to the
```
